You almost did a presumptive close on the upcoming Indian
election, which is going to happen much sooner than the
American election.
So is that does that have any consequence or change
in the way you think about the framing of this?
I'll take this one at the risk of getting in
some trouble now.
I think that well we we we had Rahul Gandhi
here last year and one of the things that was
striking with him was that there really wasn't much daylight
difference in terms of foreign policy on any number of
issues with the the prevailing government.
He refused.
He basically said he agrees with the government on Russia,
Ukraine at the time on China.
I think he's following that that same path.
So in terms of foreign policy, I mean I I
think we all know who's most likely to win.
It's going to be BJP.
But even in some unlikely event that somewhat that Congress
comes in, I think we know what we're going to
get on both sides.
OK.                            
One thing, one thing I want to add though is
one thing I want to add is in the Biden
administration, there are almost 150 Indian Americans who hold very
important positions.
That was not true in the Trump administration.
So I think that's a factor to be kept in
mind.
I think I see Amit, maybe there's one last point
and then we close.
I think that was, I think that's it.
I think we close.
Go ahead.
Yeah, shouted out.
It's OK, yeah, I just.
Wanted to say that I don't want to speak internal
reframing of the relationship because I I see a very
powerful undercurrent that's occurring.
You know, having done civilizational studies for about 30 years,
I think India is coming into its own.
It's getting very confident and some of that needs to
play to the reframing.
I think the question I would ask is, you know
when you said James that they are not relationship, I
think there is a lot but it means that refraining
and I think it's so important to forwarding this relationship.
Out of time the.
United States and India seeing each other as deep civilizations.
And what can India bring to the table in this
new age of AI with the human values and, and,
a lot of, you know, fascinating.
I mean, I'd say with all due respect and that's
a great topic, but it take a long time to
to deal with and I I see Amit already showing
me the no.
You you can just take one more.
You have one more minute please like.
Go ahead, James.
I think that's an interesting idea.
I mean, I think the bigger challenge is that the
United States is not a civilizational, doesn't have a civilizational
world view.
And in that sense, India has more in common with
China.
And and that's sort of part of the the sort
of enduring tension that the US liberal internationalism is not
really one that deep down India shares.
And therefore, that's why I sort of view this as
more of a marriage of convenience than a love marriage,
if you see what I mean.
I want to add one thing, James.
I want to add one thing.
You said what is India giving to the USI think
India's export of human capital in the next decade is
something the US and other countries would want to have.
I call it the geriatric economy that's coming in all
the Western countries.
They're going to need doctors and nurses, They're going to
need staff and India is going to be able to
provide that.
I think that's what US is going to get.
Back it's around.
All right.
I think I'll wrap it up.
Yeah.
Sorry, I'd say, well, thank you.
It was a great conversation.
Sorry I couldn't take, you know, I think we're really
out of time.
So thank you.
Let's catch up separately with the panelists after this.
Thanks again.
Do you have a comment or you have a question?
I have.
A question.
OK, go ahead.
I mean as long as we have.
Arun Kumar, on how the diaspora has changed, the changing
nature of the diaspora, but how do you think the
engagement of the diaspora with India has changed over time?
You can you, can you talk a little bit about
that?
Yeah, I think, I think it's changed for the positive
in terms of just the bridges, the number of direct
flights from San Francisco to India, the 7th, 17 flights
a week, right.
I mean things, I think the investments, I think that
tons of for diaspora investing in India that says it
all in my mind.
Why are they investing in India, not in any, not
in the USA.
Lot of capital is going to India from the diaspora.
Personal wealth is going to India.
So that says it all.
And just on the economic, you covered the economic really
well.
But politically, it's amazing to me.
When we get, for instance, a group of generals who
come 20 generals might come from National Defence College, you
ask them how many of you have relatives in the
US, Half them, half the hands go up, right?
That has some kind of effect because they're observing what's
going on in this country.
They're getting better understanding of what's going on in this
country.
There's more communication that's happening from a lower level person
to person level.
That then manifests in really important ways for the relationship.
Very good point.
Great.
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank.
You thank you for this fascinating conversation, Arun.
So we'll quickly thank you.
So we'll quickly move on to our next talk.
We have somebody out here.
Can I have your attention please, Asha, please.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
OK.
So we'll we'll get get going with the next session
or the next part of the program.
We have a very interesting gentleman here.
His name is Arun Mazumdar, one person who possibly needs
no introduction in Bay Area, possibly across the world as
well.
Now for a simple reason that he's somebody who created
the first school or who's the founding Dean for the
first school that was created at Stanford in 75 years
for the Dyer School.
He's the Dean here, in fact one of the foremost
authorities on climate and energy.
I don't, I think you don't really need much more
introduction from my side, but one of the most prolific
academics that you will ever meet in your life.
I don't know.
Over to you for your talk, please.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot for joining us today.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
I don't know if there's a clicker.
Is there a clicker?
There it is.
Where do you want me to stand?
Over there.
Out here.
You're the boss.
OK.
Thank you.
I want to thank Amit and Richard Dasher for putting
this together.
For those of you who are not from Stanford, welcome
to Stanford.
The last time I visited India was in August, the
23 for the B20 meeting.
This is Chandra, who's the chairman of Tata and also
chairman of the B20.
Happens to be in my Advisory Board.
So he said why don't you come and join, which
I did.
I don't know how Chandra, you know, framed it.
I mean, it was the timing was impeccable because India
had just landed Chandrayaan 3 on the South Pole of
the moon, which is a amazing historic moment.
And if you combine this with the the digital infrastructure
for payments, the inclusive growth that the Prime Minister talked
about, this is very different India that I saw than
even like 10 years ago.
And I just left with a sense of pride.
There's a contagious optimism and there's also recognition that I
think India is on a inflection point in its trajectory,
which is amazing.
I also reminded when I was on stage at the
V20I reminded people that this is not an accident when
you land on the moon.
From the US experience, I can tell you this is
not an accident.
This is the tip of the iceberg and this is
the product of an innovation ecosystem that then you recognize
the the landing on the moon, but there's much more
behind.
So just to give you an an example of what
happened in the US experience when people landed in Apollo
11/19/69 with a call to action in 1962 which I'm
going to go back to at that time.
What is not what is now recognized is that whole
innovation ecosystem in addition to the moon landing produced integrated
circuits, cellular communication, lasers, fiber optic communication, the Internet.
Early days on the Internet, 1968 was the first communication
between computers.
Some of you out here, UCLA, Santa Barbara were involved
and many, many more.
So you can one can ask the question, OK, so
India's poised to for innovation, what should it focus on?
Well, certainly it has done an amazing thing in the
digital side.
I'd like to offer a perspective which I think is
potentially the greatest challenge of this century and along with
the challenges and opportunity and is the opportunity to seize
and it's for it's up for grabs for anyone.
And the question is, will US and India seize it
together?
So I'm going to explain to you in my perspective
of the global challenge because this is a global issue
and India and US are global players.
OK.
So let me Fast forward.
OK.
So this is, this is the world population.
And whenever I've presented this, Mr.
Reminds me, you scare the heck out of people.
So I'm going to scare you a little bit, but
I'm also going to give you the flip side of
it, the opportunity.
This is the human population over the last it took
a million years to for the human population to grow
to 300 billion, and now it takes 13 years to
add a billion people.
OK, this is not exponential.
This is super exponential.
I call this the human tsunami.
Yeah.
Along with the human tsunami, there's a human consumption tsunami.
This is in terms of GDPI produce.
I put it in GDP because people are consuming.
That's why people are producing.
Right.
And this is a great story for human beings because
without this, you, you won't have the lifestyle that we
have today.
You would be in a gradient Society of what, 150
years ago, right?
This is a great story.
A life expectancy has gone up by, health has gone
up.
All of these things.
We have information on our fingertips.
That's all this.
But it's a consumption tsunami.
But to produce that, we have the energy consumption tsunami.
And I put this only in the last few.
Those arrows are my families in the generations.
I was born in the 1960s in Kolkata, grew up
in Delhi.
My kids were born here in the 1990s.
My parents were born in the 1920s and 30s.
They went through this partition.
If you recall, some of you and my grandparents were
born at the turn of the century, right in 4th
generation we went from most of the energy, from biomass
to where we are today, 80% of the fossil fuel.
So it should not be a surprise to anyone that
there is ACO 2 tsunami.
OK?
And you can extrapolate this to the water tsunami.
There's a biodiversity challenge, all of these things.
So you are at a university, you'll get a quiz
and your lunch depends on it.
I'm just kidding.
I'm going to throw some numbers at you and I
want you to think about the units.
I'm going to give you the units of the first
one to 840 twenty the 1st 2 numbers, 1°C.
It's about 1.3°C is the global average temperature rise from
that pre industrial level.
2° is the Max from the Paris agreement which India
US were both part of right?
The next number is 800.
The 800 is not 800°C.
We're not in Venus.
If you are to maintain the two degrees temperature rise.
We have a budget of 800 billion tons of CO2.
Global budget, OK 800 gig.
The next number is 40.
That's the rate of emissions of CO2 per year globally.
The last number is obvious, we're 20 years.
That's the next 20 years are likely to be the
most important 20 years to address this issue.
And when I say 1° two degrees, of course we
it's just a manifestation representation of the challenge that we
are seeing.
These are summer temperatures.
NASA data.
This is data, not projections.
And you can see in the some summers are hotter
which are red, some summers are cooler, which is you
know blue.
You can see where this distribution is going.
And the tail of the distribution, which is the heat
waves and the humidity waves, they're reaching places where this
unprecedented and that is that tail of the distribution has
a more disproportionate effect on the human health, on economies
and all that.
So this is what's going on.
And so we are, we are in this situation, this
is pretty scary.
So people have realized that we have to do something
about it.
So now this is, I call this the defining challenge
because this is not just energy.
What happens in energy we'll come to that affects water.
We all know this.
What happens in water effects, food, biodiversity, ecology, global health
and climate change effects, all of them, and generally an
adverse impact.
This is the sustainability challenge.
So people have realized this is a problem.
And so the global commitments that have been made in
Glasgow, right, India's 2070 US is 2050.
The the United Nations has sustainable development goals.
More than 60% I'm told, is 80% of the Fortune
500 companies have made some kind of climate and sustainability
commitments.
They're trying to figure out how to get there.
The commitment has been made.
They're trying to figure out the details.
The details have not been worked out.
OK.
This is like marriage.
You make a commitment.
They have to work out some details, right.
So that's what's going on and no one really has
a pathway through you ask any corporation if they say
they have a.